# Data-Science-Projects
Selected projects from relevant coursework using R

This repo contains some of my work from courses in which I employed R to solve various real-world type problems. These include topics in science, finance, and economics.

Each file folder (with the exception of Time-Series Forecasting) contains the question in a PDF document, solution in a .docx format, the source code in a R file and data files in txt and csv format. Image outputs will be displyed in pdf and png format. Time-Series Forecasting includes a PowerPoint and R code files instead.

A brief look at the projects:

1) The Capture-Recapture Method - Using Monte Carlo Simluation, the goal is to empirically test two different estimators for the size of a natural population. We would like to see if either of the models are good poulation size estimators by using various sample sizes in our simulation and testing for the bias and variance produced using each method.

2) Chocolate and Nobel Prizes (Linear Regression) - Reconstructing cardiologist Franz H. Messerli's experiment, I analyze how the amount of chocolate consumption in each country is positively correlated with a higher production of Nobel Laureates from that country and what this implies. His study is meant to be taken more as a satire, to show "whether correlation implies causation" - the answer is no. His study was published in the New England Journal of Medicine in 2012.

3) Portfolio Optimization - Using two Exchange Traded Funds, S&P 500 and Long-Term U.S. Treasury Bonds, the goal is to construct and evaluate a training set against a test set of portfolio weights. The weights given to each asset in the training set are evaluated by developing a Sharpe Ratio algorithm. The portfolio with the highest Sharpe Ratio is considered to be the optimal portfolio. I then apply the portfolio weights to the test set to see how well it performs (measured by the Excess Returns Index - the amount of return gained in excess of the risk-free rate).

4) Time Series Forecasting (Multivariate Regression) - This was an independent project idea that was carried out with another team member. We evaluated what economic and political factors can be good predictors of the Unemployment Rate. In addition to evaluating economic indicators such as Consumer Price Index, Consumer Sentiment, Consumer Confidence, Trade Balance, strength of the Dollar and Oil Prices, we also wanted to analyze how much impact the current Presidential Party in office has on the level of Unemployment. In addition,  we evaluated the impact of GDP on the Unemployment Rate using the economic theory of Okun's Law. Key tasks of the project included testing the model for assumptions of a strong linear representation and correcting the model for the presence of autocorrelation in a time-series analysis.

5) Townsend Material Deprivation Index - Using data obtained from the U.S Census Bureau, I analyzed four variables utilized by the Townsend index in computing the deprivation indices of populations. In this problem, we focus on New York County census tracts (defined as regions). The variables include % of 16 and over who are umemployed, % of homes with more than one person per room, % of homes which are rented vs. owned, and % of households without a car. To reduce skewness, I scale the features using log transformations. Then I standardize the variables using the geographic mean and standard deviation for each region. Finally I sum all the standardized variables for each region to compute the deprivation index. The deprivation indices are categorized in R into color coded index ranges. In this file, there is a shape files folder, which includes the code needed for the map outline and to correctly map the locations of the indices to the corresponding regions on the map. The resulting goal is to create a color coded "heat" map.
